FAST APPROXIMATE CONVEX DECOMPOSITION
A Thesis
by
MUKULIKA GHOSH
Submitted to the Office of Graduate Studies of
Texas A&M University
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE
August 2012
Major Subject: Computer Science
FAST APPROXIMATE CONVEX DECOMPOSITION
A Thesis
by
MUKULIKA GHOSH
Submitted to the Office of Graduate Studies of
Texas A&M University
in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE
Approved by:
Chair of Committee, Nancy M. Amato
Committee Members, Jinxiang Chai
Ergun Akleman
Head of Department, Duncan M. Walker
August 2012
Major Subject: Computer Science
iii
ABSTRACT
Fast Approximate Convex Decomposition. (August 2012)
Mukulika Ghosh, B.Tech, National Instrtitue of Technology, Durgapur
Chair of Advisory Committee: Dr. Nancy M. Amato
Approximate convex decomposition (ACD) is a technique that partitions an
input object into approximately convex components. Decomposition into approxi-
mately convex pieces is both more efficient to compute than exact convex decompo-
sition and can also generate a more manageable number of components. It can be
used as a basis of divide-and-conquer algorithms for applications such as collision
detection, skeleton extraction and mesh generation. In this paper, we propose a
new method called Fast Approximate Convex Decomposition (FACD) that improves
the quality of the decomposition and reduces the cost of computing it for both 2D
and 3D models. In particular, we propose a new strategy for evaluating potential
cuts that aims to reduce the relative concavity, rather than absolute concavity. As
shown in our results, this leads to more natural and smaller decompositions that
include components for small but important features such as toes or fingers while
not decomposing larger components, such as the torso that may have concavities due
to surface texture. Second, instead of decomposing a component into two pieces at
each step, as in the original ACD, we propose a new strategy that uses a dynamic
programming approach to select a set of nc non-crossing (independent) cuts that
can be simultaneously applied to decompose the component into nc + 1 components.
This reduces the depth of recursion and, together with a more efficient method for
computing the concavity measure, leads to significant gains in efficiency. We provide
comparitive results for 2D and 3D models illustrating the improvements obtained
by FACD over ACD and we compare with the segmentation methods given in the
iv
Princeton Shape Benchmark.
v
To My Family and Teachers
vi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I could not have accomplished this work without the help and support of an
amazing group of people. They have all had important roles to play in this work and
also in my life.
First and foremost, I would like to thank my advisor, Dr. Nancy M. Amato,
for all her support and guidance. Dr Amato, you were the best advisor that I could
possibly have. Thank you for showing me just how much I could achieve. I have
learned a great deal from you.
I would like to thank my committee members, Dr. Jinxiang Chai and Dr. Ergun
Akleman, for their cooperation, patience and support. I am truly grateful.
I would also like to thank all the members of the Algorithms and Applications
group in the Parasol Lab.
Dr. Jyh-Ming Lien and Yanyan Lu provided invaluable support and advice.
They gave me the inspiration to strike out in new directions in terms of research
ideas.
I have thoroughly enjoyed working with each and every one of the people named
above. Again, I would like to thank everyone for their help, support and guidance.
Last but definitely not the least - I would like to thank my family for all their
support. I would not be where I am today without them.
vii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER Page
I INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1. Contribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
II RELATED WORK . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1. Shape Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2. Convex Decomposition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
III PRELIMINARIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1. Decomposition and Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
2. Bridges and Pockets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3. Concavity Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
a. Relative Concavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
IV OVERVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
V FINDING INDEPENDENT POTENTIAL CUTS . . . . . . . . 15
1. Potential Cuts in 2D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
a. Construction of Bridges and Pockets . . . . . . . 15
b. Potential Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
2. Potential Cuts in 3D . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
a. Construction of Bridges and Pockets . . . . . . . 19
b. Potential Cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
VI CUT-GRAPH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
VII SELECTING FINAL CUTS USING RELATIVE CONCAVITY 26
1. Determining a Linear Ordering of Components . . . . 26
2. Dynamic Programming . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
VIII OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EFFICIENCY . . . . . . 29
1. Merging of Convex Hulls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
2. Updating Concavity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
IX RESULTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
viii
CHAPTER Page
X CONCLUSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
VITA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
ix
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE Page
1 Bridges β0, β1, β2, and β3, and their pocket minima. Bridges β0
and β1 are the kids of β2. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2 Pocket cuts shown in dashed red lines connecting the feature
points (red circles) on the bold blue boundaries of the pocket ρ
(blue) under the bridge β with faces β1, β2 and β3 that has black
boundaries. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
3 (a) Approximate Decomposition [1] of dinopet model with tol-
erance 0.07 to highlight the fingers in hands and feet causing
unnecessary segmentation in neck and toe region. No decompo-
sition near tail. (b)(c) Dinopet decomposition using two different
thresholds for relative concavity. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
4 Convolution of a V-shaped polygon and a circle. Source pair
(S1, S2) of an intersection x of the convolution forms a bridge β. . . . 16
5 (a) Bridges and pocket minima of the input elephant polygon.
The (red) circles are detected pocket minima and the size of the
circle indicates the relative significant of the features. (b) The
simplified polygon and its candidate cuts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
6 Cut graph of a model: (a) Model with high score cuts as bold
black and low score as thin blue. (b) Corresponding cut-graph as-
suming symmetric cuts a′,b′,c′,d′ on the opposite side. (c) Cycles
extracted from cut-graph. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
7 Disconnected pocket cuts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
8 Cut-graph example in 2D: (a)The model with the candidate cuts
(b) Corresponding cut-graph with bold line showing the backbone
and the dotted edges represent branches. Euler tour used for
arrangement is shown by arrowed lines covering the graph. . . . . . . 25
x
FIGURE Page
9 Merging convex hulls in 2D: (a) The polygons (shown in gray)
with their convex hull (shown in bold lines surrounding the poly-
gon). (b) Subdivision of hull-edge to include cut in the input
hull boundary. (c) Joining the convex hulls. Newly constructed
hull-edges are shown in dashed lines. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
10 2D FACD using relative concavity threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
11 FACD of various models highlighting decomposition along struc-
tural features. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
12 FACD and ACD of various models using two different levels of
threshold. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
13 Hierarchical Decomposition : In decreasing order of tolerance . . . . 37
14 Comparison of Model number 281 with the human(benchmark)
segmentation and 7 segmentation given in Princeton Benchmark
[2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
15 Comparison of Model number 17 with the human(benchmark)
segmentation and 7 segmentation given in Princeton Benchmark
[2] . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
16 Evaluation of metrics using Princeton Benchmark [2] . . . . . . . . . 41
17 Time (sec) vs. Number of Components in various models for
FACD and ACD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
xi
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE Page
I Comparison of FACD with respect to (a) Tolerance (τ ), (b) num-
ber of components, (c) variance in concavity and (d) time. . . . . . . 42
1
CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
The size and complexity of geometric models is continually increasing due to im-
proved tools and techniques for generating them and the computational resources
available to render and process them. As such, there is an increased need for tech-
niques to manipulate them. For geometric objects, convex decomposition [3] is an
appealing strategy as it decomposes the model into convex components which may
be easier to process than the original non-convex model. For example, convex de-
composition has application in collision detection [4], where the original model is in
collision if and only if at least one of its convex components is in collision, and there
exist simple algorithms to test collision between convex objects. Unfortunately, algo-
rithms decomposing a large object into exact convex pieces can be computationally
inefficient and generate an unmanageable number of components.
Since sometimes minor concavities of the model in the form of surface texture
or noise can be ignored, methods have been proposed that decompose an input
model into approximately convex pieces that are allowed to have concavities that are
within some specified tolerance. The idea is that these approximately convex pieces
frequently have similar benefits as their convex counterparts, but the decomposition
can be computed more efficiently and can result in significantly fewer components.
For example, approximate convex components can be used as the basis of simplified
representations of objects such as skeletons or silhouettes [5].
The approximate convex decomposition (ACD) algorithm of Lien and Amato
[1, 6] uses a greedy approach to decompose an input object into approximately convex
The journal model is IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control.
2
pieces. It finds the maximum concave vertex in the model and computes a “good”
cut containing that vertex, which decomposes the model into two components. These
two components are then recursively decomposed until their maximum concavity does
not exceed a user-defined tolerance limit. The strategy results in human-perceivable
components more efficiently than exact convex decomposition. Various other decom-
position algorithms [7] extend the notion to generate natural-looking decomposition
of complex models within reasonable time.
There are a few challenges when using the ACD algorithm. First, the selec-
tion of an appropriate tolerance can be difficult and input dependent, requiring a
priori knowledge of the concavity of the input model. Moreover, using the same
fixed tolerance to resolve concavity in the decomposed components, can cause over-
segmentation in certain areas of the model. Second, applying a single cut at every
iteration can result in a large number of iterations. When many of the segmentation
boundaries are independent of each other, the ACD decomposition process is com-
putationally inefficient because it involves recomputation of concavity information
repeatedly. While there have been several recent efforts proposed to improve the
quality of ACD [7, 8, 9] using optimization techniques, these methods focus mostly
on 2D polygons and usually ignore efficiency issues.
1. Contribution
In this thesis, we propose a method called Fast ACD (FACD) that provides higher
quality and better efficiency than the existing 2D and 3D ACD algorithms [1, 6, 7,
8, 9].
FACD improves the quality of the resulting decomposition. In particular, instead
of a fixed tolerance for the model, FACD computes a relative concavity measure for
each cut that quantifies the impact of the cut on the concavity with respect to
3
its surrounding region in the model. As seen in the results, this tends to produce
more natural decompositions, e.g., by producing components for relatively small but
important features such as fingers or toes while not decomposing around surface
texture or undulation that might have similar absolute concavity.
FACD increases the efficiency of the computation. In particular, instead of de-
composing into two components with a single cut containing the most concave vertex
at each step as in the original ACD, FACD uses an approach to select multiple in-
dependent (non-crossing) cuts which are applied in parallel to decompose the model
into multiple components. Additionally, we use an optimized method to compute
concavity information that reduces redundant computation. Together, these modifi-
cations result in significant efficiency gains.
While the improvements proposed can be easily extended to higher genus model,
but the experimental results in this thesis are validated for null-genus models.
Chapter II presents an overview of related work and Chapter III gives basic
definitions and concepts. An overview of the algorithm is provided in Chapter IV.
Chapter V- VII describe the main steps of the algorithm in more detail. Chapter VIII
describes some implementation details. Results are presented in Chapter IX.
4
CHAPTER II
RELATED WORK
Segmentation is a highly studied problem in the literature, see a recent survey [10].
It is usually viewed as an optimization problem that divides the input model while
minimizing or maximizing some given criteria or property.
1. Shape Decomposition
Much recent work focuses on creating visually meaningful decompositions. Vari-
ous decomposition algorithms are provided to decompose a model in two-dimensions
[11, 12, 13, 14]. For example, Juengling and Mitchell [14] formulate decomposition
of a polygon as an optimization problem and apply dynamic programming to find
the optimal subset of cuts from all possible cuts. The objective function used for
optimization favors short cuts that create dihedral angles close to π. Mi and DeCarlo
[15] propose to decompose a shape into elliptical regions glued together by hyperbolic
patches. Their method defines the idea of relatability based on smoothed local sym-
metries that measure how easily two separate curves can be joined together smoothly
and naturally. Thus, reasonable cuts are located at places where relatability increases
quickly.
In 3D, most segmentation algorithms [16, 17] use clustering algorithms to define
the segmentation boundaries and retain or discard them according to the satisfiabil-
ity of the criteria by the components. Determining the boundaries of the clusters is
influenced by topological constraints such as geodesic distance, curvature or dihedral
angles. A simplified representation of the input object, such as a curvilinear skeleton
as in [18], is sometimes used to aid the decomposition. The underlying approach is
to construct the simplified representation, exploit it to define the segment bound-
5
aries, and then map these segmentation boundaries back to the original model. An
algorithm proposed by Aouada and Krim [19] uses a Reeb graph of the model and
determines the segments using Morse theory; [8] is similar but uses a convex graph
instead. Pre-processing or user assistance is required to construct the curvilinear
skeleton or Reeb graph of the input model. Sometimes, to distinguish noise from
structural concavities, simplification of the model is used to determine whether to
retain or discard cuts. Mesh boundary refinement [20] is often used to obtain smooth
and short cuts for decomposition.
To obtain a segmentation close to structural features of the model, most seg-
mentation techniques use multiple deformed models of the same object as input
and define the segmentation as a minimization of the error among the poses [21].
In some cases, a pose-invariant measure [22] and multi-dimensional scaling is used
to achieve the desired decomposition. However, sometimes certain concavities are
underestimated using such scaling.
2. Convex Decomposition
Researchers in computational geometry have studied methods to create convex de-
compositions subject to some optimization criteria, such as a minimum number of
components [3, 23]. Most of these problems are known to be NP-hard. Approximate
convex decomposition (ACD) [1] aims at minimizing concavity along with obtaining
balanced partitions with perceivable components. Wan [7] extends [1] to incorporate
both concavity and curvature and prevents over segmentation by avoiding cuts inside
pockets.
Recently, Liu et al. [8] and Ren et al. [9] have proposed to create fewer and
more natural nearly convex shapes. Both methods [8, 9] use mutex pairs to enforce
the concavity constraint. Points p1 and p2 form a mutex pair if their straight line
6
connection is not completely inside the given shape. Their focus is on separating all
mutex pairs whose concavity-based weights are larger than a user-specified threshold.
Liu et al. [8] used linear programming to compute the decomposition with minimum
cost, and Ren et al. [9] applied a dynamic subgradient-based branch-and-bound
search strategy to achieve a minimum number of cuts.
Most of these extensions [8, 9, 7] of ACD focused on 2D polygons. Three-
dimensional models are handled by projecting the model into two-dimensions [8, 9].
The projections are segmented and mapped back on the original object. However,
the segmentation boundaries become restricted with respect to the choice of the
projection planes and their orientation. FACD avoids these problems by working
directly on 3D meshes.
7
CHAPTER III
PRELIMINARIES
A model, M , in this work is a polygon or polyhedron that is defined by a set of
boundaries in R2 or R3, respectively. Each boundary consists of a set of connected
edges in 2D or faces (planar polygons bounded by edges) in 3D, respectively. A
surface is denoted by a sequence of edges in 2D or by a set of faces connected along
edges in 3D. The boundary of a surface is defined as the end-vertices of the poly-line
in 2D and the set of external edges bounding the surface in 3D.
The convex hull [24] of a model M , CHM , is defined as the smallest convex set
containing M . It is the intersection of all convex sets containing the model. Hence,
the convex hull of a convex model is the model itself. Concavities are identified as
the notches, ditches or holes in the model. More specifically, they are the subset of
the model boundary (possibly empty) that are not on the convex hull boundary.
1. Decomposition and Cuts
Decomposition or segmentation divides an input model into a collection of smaller
models that can be combined to yield the input model.
Definition .1 A decomposition D of model M is defined as a set of components
{Mi}, such that the union of the Mi is the model M and every pair of Mi is interior
disjoint:
D(M ) = {Mi|∪iMi = M and ∀i6 =j M ◦
i ∩ M ◦
j = ∅} (3.1)
where M ◦
i is the open set of Mi, i.e.,Mi excluding its boundary.
Definition .2 The cuts {Ci} in a decomposition D of a model M , are the maxi-
mal boundaries of the components Mi that are not boundaries of M . Note that the
8f
b
c
h
x
a β2
d
e
y g
β0
β1
β3
Fig. 1.: Bridges β0, β1, β2, and β3, and their pocket minima. Bridges β0 and β1 are
the kids of β2.
application of {Ci} on M gives the components {Mi}.
Although in 3D a cut is defined as a set of faces, for convenience we sometimes
refer to the cut as the cycle of boundary edges of this set of faces. Hence in this
work, a cut denotes a set of faces or a cycle of model edges interchangeably.
2. Bridges and Pockets
A bridge is a structure constructed over a concave region in a model. For example, a
CH edge or face that is not part of the model can be a bridge or be part of a bridge,
as β2 in Fig. 1 or β2 in Fig. 2.
More precisely, a bridge can be defined as:
Definition .3 A bridge β of a d-dimensional model M is a d-dimensional connected
surface with no holes such that all vertices in β lie on ∂M , the boundary of M , and
the open set of the boundary of β is contained in the complement of M , M .
Therefore in 2D, a bridge is a poly-line that cannot enter polygon M or intersect
the boundary of M except at its end vertices, and in 3D, a bridge is a connected
polyhedral surface that can intersect M only along the bridge boundary. Note that
9
Fig. 2.: Pocket cuts shown in dashed red lines connecting the feature points (red
circles) on the bold blue boundaries of the pocket ρ (blue) under the bridge β with
faces β1, β2 and β3 that has black boundaries.
this definition of bridge is more general than that in [1] where a bridge was required
to be on the convex hull of M (e.g., β2 in Fig. 1). Examples of bridges in 2D are
shown in Fig. 1 and in 3D in Fig. 2.
A pocket is the projection or shadow of a bridge on the model surface. Intuitively,
it is the region on the model surface below a bridge. It can be defined as follows:
Definition .4 A pocket ρ associated with a bridge β in a model M is a contiguous
subset of the surface of M that has the same boundary as β, so that the region
enclosed by β and ρ is in M , the complement of M .
Intuitively, a bridge can be viewed as a short cut over its pocket while traversing
the boundary of M . For example, the pocket of the bridge β0 in Fig. 1 is a polyline
between vertices d and e via x, whereas the pocket of the bridge β in Fig. 2 is the
blue region ρ bordered by bold black lines. Note that even though we do not restrict
10
the bridge to be a convex hull edge or face, the pocket cannot be part of convex hull
of the model.
A cut in 2D can intersect with a pocket only at a vertex. In contrast, a cut in
3D can intersect with a pocket in a set of connected edges which is a subset of the
boundary cycle of the cut which lies inside the pocket. Each portion of the boundary
cycle of a cut that lies in a pocket is referred to as a pocket-cut. Hence, pocket-cuts
are only defined in 3D.
Definition .5 A pocket-cut pc of a cut C in pocket ρ of a 3D model M is a
maximal sub-path of the boundary cycle of C that lies entirely in ρ.
An example of a pocket cut is shown as a dashed line in Fig. 2.
3. Concavity Measurement
Concavities on the surface of the model correspond to pockets, each of which is
associated with a bridge. Intuitively, the distance from a vertex in the pocket to
its associated bridge provides a measure of its concavity. Other distances such as
the distance of the shortest-path from a vertex in the pocket to its bridge can also
be defined as a concavity measure for the vertex. Therefore, we define concavity as
follows:
Definition .6 The concavity of a pocket ρ is the maximum distance from any ver-
tex in ρ to the bridge β of ρ, i.e.,
concavity(ρ) = max
v∈ρ dist(v, β) (3.2)
where dist() is a distance metric.
Definition .7 A pocket minimum of a pocket ρ is a vertex in ρ realizing the
maximum concavity.
11
In Fig. 1, x and y are the pocket minima for β0 and β1, resp., and x is the pocket
minimum for β2.
Definition .8 The concavity of a model M , is the maximum concavity among the
pockets in M .
a. Relative Concavity
All ACD variants [1, 6, 7, 8, 9] define the acceptable tolerance with respect to some
absolute measure of the model. Hence, the user must have a priori knowledge or an
estimate of the concavity of the input structure to obtain a desired segmentation.
Also, restricting the tolerance to some absolute measure might overlook certain cavi-
ties whose absolute measures are below the tolerance but are of structural importance
with respect to their surroundings, e.g.,the toes of the dinopet model in Fig. 3(a).
Lowering the threshold of the decomposition based on such concavities results in un-
ecessary decomposition of other regions, e.g., the neck region of the dinopet model
in Fig. 3(a).
In this thesis, we introduce a new measure called relative concavity to address
these issues. Relative concavity quantifies the impact of the cut on the concavity of
the model in the surrounding region of the cut.
Definition .9 The relative concavity RC of a cut c is the ratio of the concavity
of the model M before the application of c to the concavity after decomposition along
c. More specifically,
RC(c) = mcb
mca
(3.3)
where mcb is concavity(M ) and mca is the maximum concavity of M ’s components
after the application of c.
12
(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 3.: (a) Approximate Decomposition [1] of dinopet model with tolerance 0.07
to highlight the fingers in hands and feet causing unnecessary segmentation in neck
and toe region. No decomposition near tail. (b)(c) Dinopet decomposition using two
different thresholds for relative concavity.
Definition .10 A cut c is said to be important if its relative concavity is above
some user-defined threshold.
As will be explained later, our new variant of the ACD algorithm computes
the relative concavity of the cuts in sub-components of the model which determines
the set of cuts that will be applied to decompose the model. As shown in Fig. 3,
relative concavity decomposition of the dinopet model enables decomposition around
the fingers, toes, and tail without decomposing around the neck.
13
CHAPTER IV
OVERVIEW
In this thesis, we propose Fast ACD (FACD), which is an extension of the ACD
algorithm of Lien and Amato [1, 6]. In the original ACD approach, at each recursive
application of the method, a single cut that contains a vertex of maximum concavity
is used to decompose the current model into two components, both of which are
processed recursively. FACD aims to produce a higher quality decomposition more
efficiently than the basic ACD for both 2D and 3D models.
To improve the quality of the decomposition, we propose a new measure of
concavity that rates cuts based on the relative change they have on concavity (the
ratio of the previous to new concavity) rather than on some absolute threshold. This
allows the method, for example, to continue to segment the toes on a foot while not
decomposing a torso that has some minor surface texture.
To improve efficiency, we modify the algorithm to apply multiple cuts in a single
iteration, thus reducing the depths in recursive application. In particular, we propose
selecting multiple independent cuts that will decompose the current component into
a set of components, each of which meets the required threshold. This is done
by first identifying potential cuts. This is the only step in the FACD algorithm
which is handled differently in 2D and 3D. The potential cuts are then placed in a
weighted “cut-graph” in which edges represent cuts, vertices indicate the components
of the model obtained on application of the cuts, and weights are related to relative
concavity measurement. Next, dynamic programming is used to select a set of cuts
from the cut-graph that will be used to decompose the model. The objective function
in the dynamic programming maximizes the total concavity change that maximizes
the mutual impact of the cuts over the concavity model.
14
The basic steps of the algorithm are shown in Algorithm 1. Each step of Algo-
rithm 1 will be detailed in the following chapters.
Algorithm 1 FACD(M ,τ )
Input: A model M and tolerance τ .
Output: Components {Di} of decomposed M
1: Find the potential cuts {Ck} in M
2: Build a cut-graph G from {Ck}
3: Use G and τ to select a set of cuts {Cr}
4: Apply {Cr} to decompose M into components {Di}
5: for each d in {Di} do
6: if concavity(d) ≥ τ then
7: FACD(d,τ )
8: end if
9: end for
Note that FACD can be exploited to produce hierarchical decomposition: use
an initial tolerance to get a canonical decomposition and reduce the tolerance for a
sub-component to have a finer decomposition of a particular region corresponding to
the sub-component.
15
CHAPTER V
FINDING INDEPENDENT POTENTIAL CUTS
As stated earlier, the potential cuts are the candidates from which multiple cuts are
selected to decompose the model in parallel. In this work, the potential cuts and
therefore also the final cuts, are required to be independent such that none of them
intersect or cross each other except at their boundaries. As described below, this is
done differently in 2D and 3D.
1. Potential Cuts in 2D
While cuts in 2D could be poly-lines in this work, we consider cuts that are diag-
onals of the input model M . In particular, as triangulation of a polygon generates
independent diagonals, FACD generates potential cuts using Constrained Delaunay
triangulation of a simplified representation of the input polygon. As described in
more detail below, we obtain a simplified representation of the polygon by replacing
all the vertices in a pocket by a pocket minimum. A set of potential cuts is then
obtained by triangulating this simplified polygon [25].
a. Construction of Bridges and Pockets
Convolution (or Minkowski sum) of the input polygon with an α-circle (where α
is the diameter of the circle) is used to construct the bridges. The convolution of
polygon M with an α-circle includes edges of M translated by α/2 in their outward
normal direction and arcs with radius α/2 centered at vertices of M connecting the
end points of the translated edges. As the boundary element can either be a line
segment from an edge of M or an arc centered at a vertex of M , an intersection x
of two non-adjacent boundary elements of the convolution can be associated with a
16
Fig. 4.: Convolution of a V-shaped polygon and a circle. Source pair (S1, S2) of an
intersection x of the convolution forms a bridge β.
pair of elements of M (i.e., edge or vertex). These edges or vertices are known as
the source pair of x. For example, in Fig. 4, s1 and s2 are the source pair of the
intersection point x.
A bridge can be constructed as a segment connecting a source pair if the the
segment does not intersect the boundary of M except at the end-vertices of the seg-
ment. Hence, if the α-circle at x is empty, then we can create a bridge by connecting
the source-pair of x. Thus, a bridge is formed between the tangent points of an
empty α-circle and M , which are the source pair of the convolution intersection x.
For example, in Fig. 4, the bridge β is created by joining s1 and s2 which are the
source-pair of x.
To find all bridges for a given α, we have to check whether the α-circles are
empty at all intersections. Fortunately, it can be shown that if a single α-circle is
empty, then all α-circles from the same orientable loop of the convolution are also
empty [26]. A loop is defined to be orientable when the normal directions of the
edges in the loop point either all inward or all outward. Hence, to construct the
17
bridges only a single intersection check is performed per orientable loop.
b. Potential Cuts
Diagonals of a triangulation are non-crossing, i.e., they are independent, and hence
are convenient to produce potential cuts. Since Delaunay Triangulations tend to
avoid skinny components, the diagonals of a Constrained Delaunay Triangulation
(CDT) have been used as cuts by Juenling and Mitchell [14] to create a natural
looking decomposition. In FACD, given a polygon M , the potential cuts of M are
the diagonals of the CDT of a simplified polygon ˜M of M . As pocket minima realize
the concavity of a pocket, the simplified polygon ˜M is composed of the pocket minima
and the vertices between every two consecutive bridges. Essentially, ˜M is M with all
pocket vertices replaced by the pocket minima. Fig. 5(b) shows a simplified elephant
polygon and its potential cuts.
(a) (b)
Fig. 5.: (a) Bridges and pocket minima of the input elephant polygon. The (red)
circles are detected pocket minima and the size of the circle indicates the relative
significant of the features. (b) The simplified polygon and its candidate cuts.
18
2. Potential Cuts in 3D
In 3D, construction of potential cuts is extended from the method used in ACD.
Construction of cuts in ACD consist of following steps:(1) Identification of pockets
by projecting convex hull faces to the model surface; (2) simplification (replacement)
of pocket boundaries with feature vertices; (3) creation of pocket-cuts by connecting
feature vertices on the pocket boundaries; (4) identification of a cycle of pocket-cuts
containing the maximum concave vertex of the model. This cycle is the boundary
cycle of the cut used to decompose the model into two components.
FACD also uses Steps(1)-(3) to generate a set of pocket cuts on the model
surface. These pocket-cuts are then organized into a pocket-cut-graph. Unlike ACD
(which extracts a single cut per recursive step), FACD extracts an independent set
of potential cuts from the pocket-cut-graph.
The main steps used to find the independent set of potential cuts are shown in
Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Potential Cuts 3D(M )
Input: Model M .
Output: Set of potential cuts {Ck}.
1: Construct the bridges, pockets and compute scores for pocket-cuts {P C}.
2: Build a weighted graph, G(V, E) from {P C}.
3: Find the connected components CC in G(V, E).
4: for each connected component cc in CC do
5: Extract independent cuts {Ci} with largest weights
6: {Ck} ← {Ck} ∪ {Ci}.
7: end for
In the following sections, we discuss the main steps of Algorithm 2 in more
19
detail.
a. Construction of Bridges and Pockets
In FACD, pockets and pocket-cuts are constructed as it is done in ACD [1, 6]. A
pocket is defined by its boundaries which are also the boundaries of its associated
bridge. These boundaries are created by projecting the boundary edges of convex
hull faces of the model on the model surface. The projection of a boundary edge of a
convex hull face can be defined as the shortest path on the model surface connecting
the end-vertices of the edge. Hence the subset of the model surface bounded by the
projected boundary edges of a convex hull face constitute a pocket and the convex
hull face used in projection forms the maximal element of its associated bridge. Each
boundary of a pocket includes a set of connected egdes on the model surface which
is then simplified using Douglas Peucker line simplification [27] to determine feature
points on the boundaries of a pocket. Pocket-cuts are then created by joining the
feature points on the boundaries of a pocket with shortest paths inside the pocket.
For example, in Fig 2, the feature points for pocket ρ are shown in red circles and
the pocket-cuts associated with them are shown by dashed lines.
b. Potential Cuts
Recall that a potential cut can be represented as a set of pocket-cuts connected in a
cycle. To facilitate the selection of an independent set of potential cuts, a pocket-cut
graph is constructed.
Pocket-Cut-Graph: The vertices in the pocket-cut graph correspond to pocket-
cuts and the edges represent the connectivity among the pocket cuts across common
features on shared pocket boundaries. In Fig. 6, the pocket-cut graph for the model
in (a) is shown in (b). The cuts a, b, c, d and e in Fig. 6(a) correspond to vertices in
20
Fig. 6(b).
As in ACD [28], pocket-cuts are scored based on their concavity and curvature.
In particular, the weight of the pocket cut pc is given in Equation 5.1.
wpc = κpccvpc (5.1)
where κpc is the accumulated curvature [29] of all edges in pc and cvpc is the concavity
of pc, which is simply the mean of the concavities of all the vertices of pc.
In the pocket-cut graph, vertices are weighed by the score of their corresponding
pocket-cut and edge weights are simply the sum of the weights of their end-points.
For example, in Fig. 6(a), let the scores of the pocket-cuts be a = d = 0.3, b = c = 0.4,
and e = 0.1. Then, for example, the weight of edge (a, b) in the pocket-cut graph
will be 0.3 + 0.4 = 0.7. See Fig. 6(b).
Extraction of Potential Cuts: This step differs in FACD from the original ACD
to facilitate handling multiple cuts. A set of vertex-disjoint cycles in the pocket-
cut graph corresponds to an independent set of potential cuts. Each connected
component of the pocket-cut graph is processed separately to extract independent
cycles. Connected components can be classified as: isolated vertex, single cycle, or a
general graph. The nature of the connected component determines the method used
for extracting the independent cycles from it.
If the connected component of the pocket-cut graph is an isolated vertex, it
represents a pocket-cut which is not contained in any cycle. These pocket-cuts might
contain important concavities of the model. As shown in Fig. 7, the cut along the
neck of the dinopet cannot form a cycle due to the absence of connecting pocket cuts
in the neighboring pockets. For such pocket-cut, the end points of the pocket-cut
are joined by a shortest path to form a new cycle.
Sometimes, the connected components in the pocket-cut graph are single cycles.
21
(a)0.7
0.7 0.7
0.7
0.7
0.4
0.40.7
0.7 0.7
b e c
d
a ′
b ′
d ′
a
c ′
(b)b ′
a ′
a
b e c
d ′
d
c ′
(c)
Fig. 6.: Cut graph of a model: (a) Model with high score cuts as bold black and low
score as thin blue. (b) Corresponding cut-graph assuming symmetric cuts a′,b′,c′,d′
on the opposite side. (c) Cycles extracted from cut-graph.
22
Such components can be identified when the degree of every vertex in the connected
component is 2. Otherwise, the connected component contains more than one cycle.
For example, as shown in Fig. 6(b), there exist two cycles in the connected com-
ponent, i.e., cycles (ab′a′b) and (dcd′c′). The edge weights of the pocket-cut graph
are used to select between intersecting non-independent cycles. In particular, the
all-pair vertex distances are calculated using a modified Floyd-Warshall algorithm.
Instead of finding the shortest distance, this algorithm maximizes the distance for
every pair of vertices. To achieve this, all edges are initialized to a negative value
except the edge in the pocket-cut graph.We augment the pocket-cut graph with ad-
ditional edges connecting a vertex to itself which also has weight initialized to a
negative value. Then, the all-pair vertex distance indicates the maximum-scored
path connecting the pocket-cuts corresponding to the vertex pair. If the weight be-
tween the vertex pair is negative, then the pocket-cuts corresponding to the vertex
pair are disconnected. Hence, if the distance of a vertex to itself is not negative,
then there exists a path that starts and ends at the pocket-cut corresponding to the
vertex. The path is a cycle and the distance calculated serves as the score of the
cycle. For example, in the graph in Fig. 6(b), none of the vertices except e has a
negative distance to itself. Thus all vertices except vertex e is part of a cycle and
two unique cycles are extracted - (aba′b′) and (cdc′d′) with scores 2.8 as shown in
Fig. 6(c). In case cycles have common vertices in their paths, the cycle with higher
score is selected.
23
Fig. 7.: Disconnected pocket cuts
24
CHAPTER VI
CUT-GRAPH
After the independent set of potential cuts is identified, by Constrained Delaunay
Triangulation in 2D or by processing the pocket-cut graph in 3D, they are placed in
a cut-graph to facilitate selection of the final cuts that will be applied to create the
decomposition. If all the potential cuts are applied, they will subdivide the model
into a set of primary components. In the cut-graph, the vertices correspond to these
primary components and edges correspond to the potential cuts separating them.
Fig. 8 shows a simple example of cut-graph construction for a two dimensional
model. The components 1-18 in 8(a) are vertices in 8(b). The cuts c1-c17 are the
edges for the graph in 8(b).
For a null genus model, the cut-graph is a tree. The cut-graphs for higher genus
models contain cycles.
25c 15
c 16
1
4
5
6 9
10
11
12
16
8
7
c 8
c 11
18
c 1
c 3
c 12
c 13
c 14
3
c 4
c 17
c 5
c 9
13
14
c 10
c 6
17
15
c 7
2 c 2
(a)1
5
6
7
8
9
12
13
1415
16
17
18
11
c 1
c 3
c 2
c 4
c 7
10
c 13
c 15
2
3
4
c 12
c 17 c 16
c 5
c 9
c 10 c 6
c 8
c 14
c 11
(b)
Fig. 8.: Cut-graph example in 2D: (a)The model with the candidate cuts (b) Cor-
responding cut-graph with bold line showing the backbone and the dotted edges
represent branches. Euler tour used for arrangement is shown by arrowed lines cov-
ering the graph.
26
CHAPTER VII
SELECTING FINAL CUTS USING RELATIVE CONCAVITY
With the cut-graph representation, a decomposition can be viewed as a selection of
set of edges in the graph. Removal of those edges from the cut-graph partitions the
graph into a set of connected components or clusters which represent the decomposed
parts of the model. In ACD, a greedy approach for selecting cuts is used. In this
work, we apply a dynamic programming approach which attempts to improve the
quality and efficiency of the decomposition.
1. Determining a Linear Ordering of Components
A linear ordering of the initial sub-problems is important when applying dynamic
programming, e.g., as in matrix multiplication [30]. As the cut-graph encodes the
adjacency of the components, an ordering can be specified by a traversal of it. An
Euler Tour [31] of an undirected graph corresponds to a depth-first traversal of the
graph. In this work, we use an Euler Tour but direct it first along a path realizing
the diameter of the graph (the diameter is the longest path in the graph). Then, the
rest of the graph can be considered to be branches adjacent to the diameter path.
These branches are recursively processed in a similar manner by first traversing the
longest path in the branch.
For the graph in Fig. 8(b), the diameter is shown in bold lines, namely the path
from 1 to 10 and the branches as the dotted lines. For a vertex containing multiple
branches, the largest branch has higher priority over others. For example, in the
cut-graph shown in Fig. 8(b), the tour is shown by the arrowed lines surrounding
the graph. Hence the arrangement used: 1-2-3-4-5-6-7-8-9-10-9-8-7-6-11-6-5-12-13-
14-13-15-13-12-16-17-16-18-16-12-5-4-3-2-1.
27
For higher genus models, the graph contains cycles. In case of cycles, we separate
the branches which form the cycles from the cut-graph and the dynamic programming
is applied on the resulting sub-graph. The results from all sub-graphs in the cut-
graph are merged to get the final set of cuts. Sometimes, the diameter of the graph
might form a cycle (eg., a torus). Such cases are handled by picking the highest
weighted edge in the diameter to disconnect the circular path. The edge or the cut
selected to break the cycle is considered important and is included in the set of final
cuts.
2. Dynamic Programming
Given a set of potential cuts, the final cuts are selected using dynamic programming.
The goal is to select the cuts which have maximum impact on the concavity and
maximizes the relative concavity measure of important splitting cuts. The primary
components, represented as vertices in the cut-graph, are the initial sub-problems of
the dynamic programming. Each sub-problem is a subsequence of the linearization
of the components obtained from the Euler Tour of the cut-graph. Hence, each
sub-problem represents a consecutive region in the input model bounded by some
potential cuts.
The objective function of the dynamic programming maximizes the relative con-
cavity measure of important splitting cuts, i.e., those whose relative concavity is
above a user-defined threshold. Given a sequence of n components, S[i, j] denotes
the sub-problem including component i to component j in the sequence. Let ck be
the splitting cut in S[i, j] joining sub-problems S[i, k] and S[k + 1, j]. Then the
objective function can be formulated as follows:
S[i, j] = max
i≤k<j {S[i, k] + S[k + 1, j] + RC(ck)} (7.1)
28
where i < j and S[i, i] = 0. RC(ck) denotes the relative concavity measure of the
cut ck. The final cuts in the subproblem S[i, j] include the cuts in sub-problems
S[i, kmax] and S[kmax + 1, j] and the cut ckmax .
29
CHAPTER VIII
OPTIMIZATION STRATEGIES FOR EFFICIENCY
To determine the relative concavity for a cut, it is necessary to measure the concavity
before and after application of the cut. Similar to ACD [1, 6], we measure concavity
as the perpendicular distance from a vertex to hull surface. However, in ACD,
the convex hulls used for measuring concavity were built from scratch after each
decomposition even when only a small subset of the convex hull was changed by the
decomposition. In this section, we describe a method that reuses the existing convex
hulls of the sub-components to construct the convex hull of the merged component.
During the process of constructing the convex hull of the merged component, the
concavity information is also updated simultaneously.
We propose an incremental algorithm to construct the convex hull of merged
object from the existing convex hulls of the sub-components. It is assumed that
the sub-components to be merged intersect only along a common cut. Hence, the
hulls of the sub-components are merged along this common cut. This is done by
including or tracing the cut in the hull structures and joining the hulls along the
traced cut. However, merging the hulls along the cut might result in a concave
structure, especially faces or edges neighboring the cut. Hence a convex envelope
is constructed over the cut by iteratively merging pair of adjacent edges (in 2D) or
faces (in 3D) starting from those along the cut. The merging is continued with the
newly added faces or edges and their neighbors till the resulting structure is convex.
The basic steps of the algorithm are stated in Algorithm 3, and Fig. 9 shows a
2D example of the proposed method.
30
Algorithm 3 Concavity Estimate(L,R,C)
Input: Hulls of the models to be joined, L and R, and the orientable cut C.
Output: An estimate of the hull of the joined model J with estimate of the concavity
for most of its faces.
1: Find the cut C on hull surface of L and R.
2: Merge L and R along C.
3: Populate queue Q with faces adjacent to C.
. Q stores possible candidates realizing concavity of the merged structure.
4: while Q is not empty do
5: (l, r) = pop(Q).
. Iterative merging along the intersection of the hulls till the result structure
in convex.
6: if (l, r) intersect concavely then
7: J ← Merge (l,r).
8: Update concavity of faces in J.
9: For each face j in J and its neighbor nj , push(Q,(j, nj )).
10: end if
11: end while
1. Merging of Convex Hulls
In 2D, given a diagonal or cut, we first position the cut in the input convex hulls.
For example in Fig. 9(a), the cut u,v is shown as a red line segment on the boundary
of the input models shown in gray. The convex hulls of the models are shown in
bold lines around the polygons. As stated earlier, convex hull edges are also bridges
overhead to the concave vertices of the polygon. Sometimes both or one of the
cut-vertices might lie inside the input convex hull. In such cases, we identify and
31u
v
e v
u
(a)v
u
v e 2
e1
u (b)ue′
v
u
ve′ (c)
Fig. 9.: Merging convex hulls in 2D: (a) The polygons (shown in gray) with their
convex hull (shown in bold lines surrounding the polygon). (b) Subdivision of hull-
edge to include cut in the input hull boundary. (c) Joining the convex hulls. Newly
constructed hull-edges are shown in dashed lines.
subdivide the bridge overhead to the cut-vertex which lies inside the hull such that
there exists exactly two incident edges in the hull for each cut-vertex. For the hull
in Fig. 9(b), the vertex v lies inside the hull. The hull-edge e overhead of v is thus
sub-divided into two hull-edges e1 and e2.
We then join or merge both the input hulls along the cut-vertices. The resulting
structure after joining the hulls in Fig 9(b) along vertices u and v is shown in Fig 9(c).
Now, the merged structure might still be concave and in particular, the potential
area of concavity will lie along the common cut where the hulls were merged. If an
adjacent pair of edges along the traced cut in the merged structure exhibit concavity,
then they are replaced by their convex covering (a new edge joining the ends of
the adjacent edges). In Fig 9(c), the hull-edges adjacent to both the vertices u,v
(shown in bold lines) have concave intersection. The overhead hull-edges ve′ and
ue′ (shown in dashed lines in Fig 9(c)) are thus constructed. The newly created
32
structure might still be concave along the end-vertices of the newly added edges and
hence the process is repeated with the newly added edges and their neighbors till
the resulting structure is convex. As shown in Fig. 9(c), the newly added hull-edge
ve′ shows concave intersection with its neighboring hull-edges and hence iteratively
merged to give the final hull of the merged model.
Similarly, in 3D the cut is traced out on both the input hulls. However, sub-
division of faces is not as easy as in 2D. It involves projecting the cut-vertices on the
input-hulls and splitting the hull faces such that there exists exactly two unique faces
in each of the input hulls adjacent for every edge in the cut. As in 2D, the input hulls
are merged or joined along the cut. We then search for concavities between pair of
adjacent faces along the cut in the merged structure. If two adjacent faces exhibit
concavity, they are replaced by their convex hull. This creates new faces which
might have concave intersection with their neighboring faces. Hence the process is
continued with the newly created faces and their neighbors till no pair of adjacent
faces in the resulting structure has concave intersection.
2. Updating Concavity
We now describe how the concavity computation is included with the hull merging
process. Note that a hull-edge in 2D is a bridge and a hull-face in 3D can be part of a
bridge. Every bridge has a point, known as witness, is associated with its underlying
pocket minimmum (a vertex realized maximum concavity). Then, as a new bridge
(a edge in 2D or a set of faces in 3D) is constructed, its concavity is computed as
given by Equation 8.1
cnew = max {(cl + dl), (cr + dr), dc} (8.1)
33
where cnew is the estimated concavity for the newly created bridge, cl and cr are the
concavities of the witnesses of the bridges merged, and dl, dr and dc are the distances
of the witnesses of the former bridges, and of the joining vertex (or vertices), to the
new bridge respectively. The witness of the newly created bridge is the projection of
the vertex realizing the maximum concavity as computed by Equation 8.1.
34
CHAPTER IX
RESULTS
All the experiments are conducted on a PC with Pentium CPU and 2GB RAM.
Examples of 2D FACD are shown in Fig. 10 and examples of 3D FACD are shown
in Fig. 3 in page 12, Fig. 11 in page 35 and Fig. 12 in page 36.
Fig. 10.: 2D FACD using relative concavity threshold
In Fig. 10, structural features such as the leg and hand of the rat model and
the leg of the horse model are emphasized. Local concavities or irregularities in the
model boundary as in the neck of horse model are not segmented. Similarly in Fig. 11,
features important with respect to the structure of the model (for example the fingers
in the Armadillo and the ears in the Horse model) are decomposed. However, as the
concavity of the model depends on the pose of the input model, certain structural
features might be overlooked. As shown in Fig. 11, the horse model has three cuts
along the hind legs whereas the fore legs are segmented into two components. The
decomposition also depends on the set of potential cuts. As in the Aphrodite model
in Fig. 11, no segmentation is obtained along the concavities around the hand as the
algorithm considers them as local concavities. Thus, FACD ignores small undulation
or irregularities in form of surface noise.
35
(a) Screw-
driver (b) Bull (c) Rhinocerous (d) Bear
(e) Duck (f) Donkey (g) Fish (h) Deer (i) Dog
(j) Aphrodite (k) Hand (l) Octupus
(m) Fandisk (n) Horse (o) Armadillo (p) Human
Fig. 11.: FACD of various models highlighting decomposition along structural fea-
tures.
36
(a) FACD (b) FACD lower
threshold (c) ACD (d) ACD lower
threshold
(e) FACD (f) FACD lower
threshold (g) ACD (h) ACD lower
threshold
(i) FACD (j) FACD lower
threshold (k) ACD (l) ACD lower
threshold
(m) FACD (n) FACD lower
threshold
(o) ACD (p) ACD lower
threshold
Fig. 12.: FACD and ACD of various models using two different levels of threshold.
37
(a) Calf
(b) Bird
(c) Human
Fig. 13.: Hierarchical Decomposition : In decreasing order of tolerance
38
A hierarchical decomposition can be obtained by decreasing the threshold as
shown in Figure 13 in page 37. Fig. 14 and Fig. 15 show a comparison of Ar-
madillo man and a Human model respectively with corresponding human segmenta-
tion (Benchmark) and seven other decomposition algorithm available in the Princeton
Mesh Segmentation Benchmark [2].
(a) FACD (b) Benchmark (c) Core Extraction
(d) Fitting Primitives (e) K Means (f) Normalized Cuts
(g) Random Cuts (h) Random Walks (i) Shape Diameter
Fig. 14.: Comparison of Model number 281 with the human(benchmark) segmenta-
tion and 7 segmentation given in Princeton Benchmark [2]
The comparison result shows that FACD follows closely to the segmentation
39
(a) FACD (b) Benchmark (c) Core Extraction
(d) Fitting Primitives (e) K Means (f) Normalized Cuts
(g) Random Cuts (h) Random Walks (i) Shape Diameter
Fig. 15.: Comparison of Model number 17 with the human(benchmark) segmentation
and 7 segmentation given in Princeton Benchmark [2]
40
provided by human and hence is more natural looking as compared to the others.
The metrics used to evaluate the decompositions in Princeton Benchmark is used to
evaluate 5 models from Human and Armadillo category given in the benchmark. The
metrics cut discrepancy (distance between segment boundaries), hamming distance
(surface area difference), and rand index (likelihood of a pair of faces exist in same
segment) are compared in Fig. 16 in page 41. However, the metrics are like shape
evaluation metrics and the segmentations compared to (even, human benchmark)
depends not only on concavity but other factors like compactness, skeletal structure.
For example, over-segmentation might effect in having a low value of cut-discrepancy.
Hence the metric varies with experimental models and the constraints used in seg-
mentation method. As shown in Fig. 16, FACD maintains a consistent low value
(if not the lowest in all of them) across all metrics and is comparable to the human
segmentations.
We next compare FACD results with ACD using concavity improvement, num-
ber of components, and time for two different tolerance values. Concavity improve-
ment is specified as the total variance in the concavity of the decomposed parts. It
is the difference between the maximum concavity among the decomposed parts and
that of original model. Table I in page 42 shows the comparison of the decomposition
on the experimental models with respect to the number of components and concavity
improvement. However, significant variance in concavity is observed for the female
and triceratops model on decreasing tolerance values. This shows FACD decomposes
along the areas with significant change in concavity.
The corresponding decomposition using ACD is also given in Fig. 12 in page 36.
Decomposition using a higher threshold in ACD is similar to that of FACD. However,
over-segmentation along the torso of the horse and cow model is observed on lowering
the threshold in ACD. Using a higher threshold of decomposition hides features
41
(a) Cut Discrepancy
(b) Rand Index
(c) Hamming Distance
Fig. 16.: Evaluation of metrics using Princeton Benchmark [2]
42
Table I.: Comparison of FACD with respect to (a) Tolerance (τ ), (b) number of
components, (c) variance in concavity and (d) time.
Models τ Size Variance Time(in sec)
FACD ACD FACD ACD FACD ACD
Triceratop 1 8 9 0.398 0.51 16.29 11.08
0.7 14 15 0.62 0.63 12.45 18.33
Cow 2 12 12 0.526 0.528 17.38 17.9
0.08 16 20 0.553 0.56 14.5 19.52
Horse 2 7 7 7.54 7.54 82.9 78.55
0.25 11 14 7.78 8.03 76.95 85.16
Female 2 10 8 13.54 12.31 177.63 168.37
0.05 14 19 17.28 17.33 135.79 200.56
having small impact on the concavity of the model as ears and hoofs in the Horse
model in Fig. 12. However in features such as legs in the triceratops model, certain
concavities with lower absolute value of concavity is retained even in higher threshold
decomposition without causing decomposition along other regions. Hence, FACD can
be used to decompose along low concave features while ignoring noise.
The number of components generated and time taken on application of ACD
on the models shown in Fig. 12 in page 36 is given in Table I. As shown in Table I,
the time increases with the number of components generated in ACD. As time in
FACD is mainly dependent on the number of potential cuts generated, for FACD
as in Table I, the time is almost same or decreases with an increase in the number
of components. As shown in Table I, the time of the computation does not vary
much with the increase in tolerance level. This is because the time of the algorithm
43
is dependent on the number of potential cuts. In particular, as shown in Figure 17,
starting from the same set of potential cuts, the time remains almost the same or
even decreases as the threshold decreases and the number of components increases
correspondingly. Hence, FACD is more efficient as compared to ACD with respect
to higher order of decomposition.
(a) Dinopet (b) Horse
(c) Cow (d) Female
Fig. 17.: Time (sec) vs. Number of Components in various models for FACD and
ACD
44
CHAPTER X
CONCLUSION
An approximate convex decomposition algorithm called FACD is proposed which
chooses the best cuts for segmentation based on their maximum mutual impact on
the concavity of the model. The decomposition is driven by the significance of the
potential cuts with respect to their surrounding region as quantified using relative
concavity.
Our experimental results show several advantages over the ACD and compares
favourably to human segmentation. However, FACD has a few limitations. In three
dimensions, our current implementation predicts a set of independent cuts. This
restricts the number of cuts in the result. Hence the decomposition of the same
input model can be changed by changing the method for prediction of potential cuts.
As the decomposition method uses a bottom-up approach. The method can
be extended to aggregation algorithms. The method can also be modified to allow
multi-tolerance hierarchical decomposition by varying the threshold parameter for
various components or sub-parts of the model.
45
REFERENCES
[1] J.-M. Lien and N. M. Amato, “Approximate convex decomposition of
polyhedra,” in Proc. 2007 ACM Symp. on Solid and Physical modeling (SPM
’07), 2007, pp. 121–131.
[2] X. Chen, A. Golovinskiy, and T. Funkhouser, “A benchmark for 3D mesh
segmentation,” ACM Trans. on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 28, no. 3,
Aug 2009.
[3] B. M. Chazelle, “Convex decompositions of polyhedra,” in Proc. 13th Annual
ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing (STOC ’81), 1981, pp. 70–79.
[4] R. Liu, H. Zhang, and J. Busby, “Convex hull covering of polygonal scenes for
accurate collision detection in games,” in Proc. Graphics Interface (GI ’08),
Toronto, Ont., Canada, Canada, 2008, pp. 203–210, Canadian Information
Processing Society.
[5] J.-M. Lien, J. Keyser, and N. M. Amato, “Simultaneous shape decomposition
and skeletonization,” in Proc. 2006 ACM Symp. on Solid and Physical
Modeling (SPM ’06), 2006, pp. 219–228.
[6] J.-M. Lien and N. M. Amato, “Approximate convex decomposition of
polyhedra and its applications,” Computer Aided Geometric Design, vol. 25,
no. 7, pp. 503 – 522, 2008, Solid and Physical Modeling - Selected papers from
the Solid and Physical Modeling and Applications Symposium 2007 (SPM
2007), Solid and Physical Modeling and Applications Symposium 2007.
[7] L. Wan, “Parts-based 2d shape decomposition by convex hull,” in Proc. IEEE
46
Int. Conf. on Shape Modeling and Applications (SMI 2009), June 2009, pp. 89
–95.
[8] H. Liu, W. Liu, and L.J. Latecki, “Convex shape decomposition,” in Proc.
2010 IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June
2010, pp. 97 –104.
[9] Z. Ren, J. Yuan, C. Li, and W. Liu, “Minimum near-convex decomposition for
robust shape representation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Computer Vision (ICCV),
June 2011.
[10] A. Shamir, “A survey on mesh segmentation techniques,” Computer Graphics
Forum, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1539–1556, 2008.
[11] M. Simmons and C. H. S´equin, “2d shape decomposition and the automatic
generation of hierarchical representations,” Int. Journal of Shape Modeling, ,
no. 4, pp. 63–78, 1998.
[12] M. T˘anase and R. C. Veltkamp, “Polygon decomposition based on the straight
line skeleton,” in Proc. 19th Conf. on Computational Geometry (SoCG). 2003,
pp. 58–67, ACM Press.
[13] T. K. Dey, J. Giesen, and S. Goswami, “Shape segmentation and matching
with flow discretization,” in Proc. Workshop on Algorithms and Data
Structures, 2003, pp. 25–36.
[14] R. Juengling and M. Mitchell, “Combinatorial shape decomposition,” in Proc.
3rd Int. Conf. on Advances in Vsual Computing - Volume Part II (ISVC’07),
Berlin, Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 183–192, Springer-Verlag.
47
[15] X. Mi and D. DeCarlo, “Separating parts from 2d shapes using relatability,”
in Proc. IEEE 11th Int. Conf. on Computer Vision, 2007 (ICCV 2007). IEEE,
2007, pp. 1–8.
[16] A. Golovinskiy and T. Funkhouser, “Randomized cuts for 3d mesh analysis,”
in ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2008 papers (SIGGRAPH Asia ’08), Singapore,
2008, pp. 145:1–145:12.
[17] V. Krayevoy and A. Sheffer, “Variational, meaningful shape decomposition,”
in ACM SIGGRAPH 2006 Sketches (SIGGRAPH ’06), Boston, Massachusetts,
2006.
[18] L. Serino, G. S. Baja, and C. Arcelli, “Object decomposition via curvilinear
skeleton partition,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. on Pattern Recognition (ICPR
’10), Washington, DC, USA, 2010, pp. 4081–4084, IEEE Computer Society.
[19] D. Aouada and H. Krim, “Meaningful 3d shape partitioning using morse
functions,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Conf. on Image Processing (ICIP’09),
Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2009, pp. 417–420, IEEE Press.
[20] L. Kaplansky and A. Tal, “Mesh segmentation refinement,” Computer
Graphics Forum, vol. 28, no. 7, pp. 1995–2003, 2009.
[21] S. Schaefer and C. Yuksel, “Example-based skeleton extraction,” in Proc. 5th
Eurographics Symp. on Geometry Processing, Aire-la-Ville, Switzerland,
Switzerland, 2007, pp. 153–162, Eurographics Association.
[22] S. Katz, G. Leifman, and A. Tal, “Mesh segmentation using feature point and
core extraction,” The Visual Computer, vol. 21, no. 8-10, pp. 649–658, 2005.
48
[23] B. Chazelle, “A theorem on polygon cutting with applications,” in Proc. 23rd
Annu. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., 1982, pp. 339–349.
[24] M. de Berg, M. van Kreveld, M. Overmars, and O. Schwarzkopf,
Computational Geometry: Algorithms and Applications, 2nd ed. Berlin,
Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2000.
[25] Y. Lu, J.-M. Lien, M. Ghosh, and N. M. Amato, “Alpha-decomposition of
polygons,” in Shape Modeling International, College Station, Texas, May.
2012.
[26] E. Behar and J.-M. Lien, “Fast and robust 2d minkowski sum using reduced
convolution,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS 2011), San Francisco, CA, Sep 2011.
[27] D. H. Douglas and T. K. Peucker, Algorithms for the Reduction of the
Number of Points Required to Represent a Digitized Line or its Caricature,
pp. 15–28, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2011.
[28] J.-M. Lien, “Approximate convex decomposition and its application,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Texas A& M University, College Station,US, 2006.
[29] A. Hubeli and M. Gross, “Multiresolution feature extraction for unstructured
meshes,” in Proc. Conf. on Visualization ’01 (VIS ’01), Washington, DC, USA,
2001, pp. 287–294, IEEE Computer Society.
[30] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to
Algorithms, 2nd ed. Cambridge, London: McGraw-Hill
Science/Engineering/Math, July 2001.
49
[31] H. Fleischner, Eulerian Graphs and Related Topics, vol. 1 of Annals of
Discrete Mathematics, Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Limited, North-Holland,
1990.
50
VITA
Name: Mukulika Ghosh
Address: c/o Dr. Nancy M. Amato
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
3112 TAMU
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX, 77843
Email Address: mghosh@cse.tamu.edu
Education: B.Tech., Computer Science & Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Durgapur
May 2007
Publications:
1. Yanyan Lu, Jyh-Ming Lien, Mukulika Ghosh, Nancy M. Amato, “Alpha De-
composition of Polygons”, To Appear Shape Modeling International (SMI),
May 2012.




